---
title: "2020, Instagram, and a Sandbox"
date: "2021-01-01"
---

Let me start out by echoing what everyone else has been saying: 2020 has been a weird year, and we send it off with a "good riddance!" Of course, not _everything_ has been troublesome, but it sure does feel like we finally crossed the finish line of a marathon we had never asked to run. Back in March, a professor told me that I should buy a journal and get to work if I hadn't already, because this year would be one for the books. He was right. Luckily for me, journaling is a frequent pastime. For me, it's a time capsule. A place to keep memories I can look back on years later and think, "I can't believe I had forgotten about that!" Another form of memory keeping many of us take part in is social media - it's a place to store pictures, captions, comments, and likes that can be reviewed by almost anyone at anytime. However, 2020 has made us realize that social media isn't necessarily all sunshine and rainbows like it's made out to be. We've become the product, the recipient of targeted ads, and flat-out addicted. I'd like to share more on that another time, but the point is this: a resolution of mine in 2021 is to say "good riddance" to Instagram. It's become a massive waste of time in my personal life, and although I've removed the app from my phone, I find myself gravitating to the browser-based version to catch up on the lives of people who don't even know my name. That's one of the reasons I've created this space: to give me the ability to share what's going on in my life in pictures, words, and novel-long rants (something I can appreciate about the Silicon Valley creation) without experiencing the pull of algorithms, comparison, and greed. When I first removed the Instagram app from my phone, my personal "fun-money" spending (as we like to call it around here) went down almost 50%. That's a big deal, and it says something about the effect of the app on my life.

In addition to vowing to not check Instagram for an entire year, I'm also resolving to read twelve books this year, one for every month. In 2020 I realized there's so much I don't know. We're constantly fed bytes of information here and there, but I want to have deep knowledge on a few topics instead of a small amount of understanding on many things. Fortunately for me, I have several friends who are avid readers and provide a constant stream of suggestions, so I don't plan on having a short "to read" list.

Lastly, you may have noticed the domain of this site is `lilie.codes`. The reason for that is that I hope this space becomes a sandbox for me, a place to exercise my frontend development skills because that's where I come alive. My day job requires a little bit of everything: requirements gathering, API design, backend development, creation of CI/CD pipelines, database management, and a little bit of frontend creativity. But I want to excel in that last item, and I've secretly always wanted to be one of those people who likes to code in their free time, I've just never had a place to do it. Until now. (If you were wondering, this site uses `Next.js`, a React framework that makes server-side rendering and static page generation quite simple).

So with that, goodbye 2020, the ironically blurriest year yet. Hello 2021.
