---
title: "Copying Zain Rizvi and Boundaries"
date: "2021-02-19"
---

I recently started reading [the work of Zain Rizvi](https://www.zainrizvi.io/). Zain, a software engineer at some of most prominent tech companies around, writes mostly about technology and psychology -- two of my favorite topics. I was first exposed to his work when a coworker passed along [a humorous article of his regarding time zones around the world](https://www.zainrizvi.io/blog/falsehoods-programmers-believe-about-time-zones/) (did you know that there are more time zones than countries? I sure didn't). I started poking around his blog only to realize that we had quite a bit in common. He is an equally big fan of Cal Newport's work as myself, and I felt like I was reading the things that I had also hoped to write about! Although I certainly plan to avoid plagiarizing his work, one nugget of advice I gleaned from him is that if you don't write about what you're reading, you're likely to forget it. Previously I shared that I intend to read at least twelve books over the course of 2021, but I would hate to get to the end of the year only to have completely forgotten everything I read.

So, with that, I'd like to share a bit of a recap (mainly my opinions) on the NYT bestseller "_Boundaries: When to Say YES, When to Say NO, To Take Control of Your Life._" Although it's a book written by Christian authors and uses Biblical scripture as reasoning in addition to psychological studies, its content is certainly not limited to Christian readers. The main premise of the book is that our generation is becoming increasingly poor at saying "no" to one another, which results in being far too busy and resentful that people continue to ask things of you because you've continued to say yes to them in the past. A vicious cycle, no? The book opens up with a story of a wife, mother, employee, volunteer, and caretaker of the home and how she seems almost incapable of fulfilling _any_ her of duties because she simply has too many of them. She is late to everything, never sleeps enough, and lacks physical and mental self-care. Her family members, boss, and co-volunteers suffer as a result, even though she's trying to help them. The authors, two counselors and psychologists, argue that this mess of a life is actually her own fault. This may seem harsh, but she has all the power in the world to say "no" to her boss when he asks for last-minute favors, the volunteer committee when they need just a few more hours of help, or when her children and husband assume that she is responsible for all meals and the dishes they produce. Your immediate thought is likely, "won't those people who hear 'no' get angry? Won't they be neglected, namely the children?" Not quite. The authors are not suggesting to say "no" and run off to live a life without responsibility. That is certainly irresponsible and quite painful to those who actually _do_ depend on you. However, by saying "yes" to everything, you enable those around you to do things that are not good for them. For example, by saying "yes" to the boss who continually asks for last minute favors, you enable them to push off their work to the last minute and be a poor delegator early on. By saying "yes" to your children and spouse when they implicitly ask you to take care of the dishes by leaving them on the table, you are missing out on an opportunity to teach responsibility. Furthermore, saying "no" to the volunteer committee might cause the chair of the committee to become angry, hurt, or judgmental. However, if you later change your mind and say "yes" to the chair to appease them, you reinforce the idea that getting angry, hurt, or judgmental gets them what they want. That's not good either.

The authors argue that there is a balance. It is true that as a wife, mother, employee, and volunteer, the woman in our story has responsibility. But she can't give her best in any of those responsibilities when she has previously committed to too much. By saying "yes" to a smaller group of things, she suddenly becomes a healthier person and the time she gives to those around her is more valuable.

Although I thought the authors' ideas were helpful, I did take some issue with them. Consider the scenario where you have a friend, a mother-in-law, a sibling, or any other kind of relationship that is somewhat exhausting to you. Maybe the other person is going through a tough time and you bear some of the grunt, or maybe they are a little bit annoying or frustrating and that takes a toll on you. The authors would suggest that if these relationships are causing you harm, you need stricter boundaries. You are to say, "our relationship causes me harm. I'm setting a boundary with you, namely, I will only spend _x_ amount of hours with you or only see you once every _x_ number of weeks." If the other person becomes hurt or angry, you are not to give in as that would reinforce that negative behavior yields positive results. While I agree that reinforcing negative behavior is not a good thing, I do believe that relationships require some give and take, some grace. There will inevitably be a time where you're the annoying friend or sibling or in-law, and how painful would it be to have all those around you abandon you or set strict boundaries in your time of greatest relational need?

Please hear me when I say that this same paradigm does not apply to abusive or dangerous relationships. I speak more to the everyday, slightly frustrating kind of relationships.

My conclusion is this: boundaries are good and helpful when they help you to say no to the things that completely overwhelm your life, the things that are causing extreme detriment. The authors encourage their readers to default to saying "no" as opposed to "yes". They suggest giving yourself some space, some breathing room. Without this, you won't be a pleasant person to be around and our goal as humans is to cultivate healthy and holy relationships.
