---
title: "My Career Game Changer: Deep Work & Digital Minimalism"
date: "2021-02-09"
---

_This is an excerpt from a presentation I recently had the chance to give to several coworkers._

Something that has made a world of difference in my career is the concept of deep work and digital minimalism. Humans today are experiencing shorter attention spans than previous generations and are finding it increasingly difficult to focus for long periods of time, read books, not multitask, and simply _do nothing_. There are many reasons for this, although the two most prominent are digital distractions and easy dopamine hits _from_ those digital distractions.

You may have seen _The Social Dilemma_ documentary on Netflix. Although the researchers and technologists mainly discuss how data is manipulated and used in non-ethical ways in the world of social media, they briefly touch on the addictiveness of social media as well. [Tristan Harris](https://www.tristanharris.com/), a former Google engineer and student of persuasive technology discusses how the same people who design slot machines are also the ones designing social media apps.

One example of this I've found to be particularly fascinating is in the instance of posting a picture on Instagram and receiving likes. Let's say someone shares a photo and within three minutes they get fifteen likes at the rate of five likes per minute. Even though the rate of likes per minute is somewhat consistent, app developers have designed this process to act like a slot machine. In the first minute, the user refreshes and sees that they have received five likes. In the second minute, they refresh and see that they have only received two likes (when in reality they have actually gotten five).

**What a disappointment.**

However, in the third minute, they receive a _whopping eight likes_! Developers have built the app to **periodically withhold reward** from the user so that it is seemingly more random and up to chance so that if the user keeps pulling at the slot machine, or in this case refreshing, they might win big. "Winning big" might look like receiving a lot of likes, comments, or other kinds of feedback at once. Learning this kind of information startled me and made me feel as if someone else was the puppeteer, controlling my emotions and ideas of success and popularity.

When I first started working at [Tripwire](https://www.tripwire.com/), I felt this ever increasing need to check my social media all day every day. I found it difficult to get things done without constantly interrupting myself. In response, I put my phone on the other side of the room instead of on my desk, making it much less accessible. It was uncomfortable at first, but I soon found myself able to spend longer periods of time focusing on one thing, forgetting my phone altogether. For my particular role, this is important. Hard questions can't be answered and complex problems can't be solved unless I remove distraction from my day. I have also recently learned that [every distraction or context-switch costs 15 minutes of time](http://gigamonkeys.com/flowers/). It pulls you out of your "flow" and getting back into it requires at least 15 minutes. I also made other small changes, like blocking off time on my calendar for focused periods of time, hiding the bookmarks bar on my browser, and making sure that I am not logged in to any social media accounts on my work computer. I try to use tools that have their own apps instead of using the browser to access them (i.e., a prototyping tool). These things have allowed me to truly grow as a software engineer. I'm able to analyze problems more deeply and understand new concepts quicker. I mourn the focused time I missed out on in college because my phone was never more than a few inches away from my hand.

I found that I enjoyed my focused time at work. What they call "flow" and "being in the zone" was really rewarding. However, immediately after I logged off in the evenings, I still found myself addicted to my phone. In response, I deleted all social media apps and suddenly found myself reading, cooking, taking the dog for frequent walks, or calling a friend or my parents. Life feels slower and ironically I feel more connected to the people I care about. I have resolved to not check Instagram for the entire year of 2021, an ambitious goal for someone who previously spent an embarrassing amount of time per day on the photo sharing platform.

[Cal Newport](https://www.calnewport.com/), the author of _Deep Work_, _Digital Minimalism_ and other related titles, has heavily influenced many of these actions. He is one of the very few who has never had a social media account and writes about the wonders of life where technology is used solely as a tool and not for entertainment. Because he is a software engineer and computer science professor at Georgetown University, I believe that he understands what my day to day work is like and values the concepts of digital minimalism and deep work for good reason. Now, I write my grocery list on paper and leave my phone at home when I run to the grocery store. I don't keep my phone on my nightstand overnight and it "goes to bed" at 10pm and doesn't "wake up" until 8am. These things have forced my technology to be what it was initially intended to be -- a tool.
