---
title: "The Privacy Paradox"
date: "2021-03-30"
---

If you have spent any amount of time with me in real life or have taken a look at any of my previous posts, you may have caught on that I'm walking a tightrope when it comes to my relationship with technology. I spend my entire work day with my hands on a keyboard and eyes on a screen. I use a smartphone, check email plenty of times a day outside of work, buy groceries remotely, and sometimes (maybe even oftentimes) prefer communicating over text than over the phone. I am a twenty-something living in a world that screams, "download our latest app!"

And we have to admit that many of those apps are actually really helpful utilities. We can communicate with those around the globe, get directions to anywhere instantaneously, and continue to do our jobs well in the midst of a global pandemic. Even social media made the idea of owning a small business without massive risk possible. However, I'm still wary because all that good stuff, all those meaningful tools, come with a lot of addicting and manipulative side effects. I've seen the morbid stats about depression, suicide rates, and loneliness. You have too, I'm sure. We were made for human interaction and for tangible activity. Nobody disagrees with that. But it requires a critical eye to separate all those good things from the bad because they are _all_ bright and shiny.

All that to say, technology is a difficult thing to navigate, which brings me to something that seems absolutely paradoxical in our current culture: privacy. When we started using software in our vehicles, our homes, and our workplaces, we became extremely connected -- to each other, to data centers, and to engineers in Silicon Valley. Determining what information should be available to whom is a fight that is only beginning. Software expands much more rapidly than our government's laws regarding privacy and oftentimes the smartest people are the ones writing the code, not writing the laws to govern it. **As good stewards of everything from our smartphones to our smart refrigerators, we have to lace up, get in the ring, and prepare to fight for what is important**.

However, as I have witnessed those around me and those across the globe work to prevent applications from misusing the data we allow them to have, I have also witnessed those same people share every single moment of their lives on any given social media platform. We get to see what they had for breakfast, lunch and dinner. We discover who they are related to, what they did on Saturday, what gifts they received for their birthday and where they live. We know that they worked out last night and what exactly they and their significant other fought about last week in the name of "vulnerability." If technology users _really_ cared about privacy, wouldn't they just stop publicly sharing all the things they wanted to keep private?

Don't get me wrong here: I think we should be able to share those things comfortably. We should be able to use social media, messaging apps, and email without worrying that someone, or some _thing_, is keeping tabs on us. But herein lies the paradox: we _could_ stop using those things, but we don't _want_ to, **because sharing our lives is part of our human nature**.

Google and Facebook and Amazon and all the other "big tech" continue to take our information, yet _we continue to give it to them, no questions asked!_ We don't bother to read the Terms & Conditions, and we click "Accept Cookies" on each new website we visit without even thinking twice.

There has to be something deeper going on here. Have humans _always_ wanted to share the intimate details of their lives with other people, or is this a digital-age phenomenon? We know that pre-twenty-first century, people wrote letters and partook in sharing their day-to-day with close communities, but they did not necessarily feel the need to publish images or stories of their latest vacation with hundreds of other people. Instead, they shared that information with the people they frequently interacted with, like coworkers, neighbors, or friends and family in the community. Because the ability to connect with hundreds of people at once (all around the globe, no less) was practically impossible, people likely felt peace about the fact that the only ones who knew about their new puppy, new job, or new baby were those closest to them. Today, that's not the case. Instead, there is anxiety when we can't share the "big news" immediately with everyone we've ever had a chance to spend a few minutes talking to (which, I mean, how big is the news, _really_?). What's even more is that few of us feel accomplished if we experience or complete something monumental _without_ sharing it and receiving affirmation. How sad!

If you are somebody who cares about privacy in our digital world (which you probably should, even if it's just a little bit), I encourage you to take a look at the things you willfully hand over to the interwebs, the cloud, the "big tech", whatever you choose to call it, and determine if those things are worth sharing publicly or not. If they are, reflect on why you might feel the need to share them. And, if you choose to move forward, you must make peace with the fact that until our digital environment experiences some serious changes, that thing you share will likely not be truly private. More than anything though, I encourage you to look up from your computer or smartphone to experience life in full.
