---
title: "Reflections and APIs"
date: "2021-06-21"
---

As July approaches, I’m actively wrapping up my first year in the tech industry. Lots has happened in the last year, both in my personal life (I got married, moved, and brought home a puppy) and around the globe (COVID-19 continued to change _everything_). Working from home has become the norm, folks have recognized the importance of having a small, solid group of friends (“covid bubble”, anyone?), and just getting through to tomorrow has proved to be a bigger feat than any of us though it might be. Asides all of the crazy we’ve been dealt, it’s been a good first year in the industry. It is 100% not what I thought it would look like, but then again, what part of life actually works out the way we expect it to?

A year ago, I joined a performance application and automation team. What that means in non-tech jargon is that I create tools for other engineers at my company to make their jobs easier. Each day has looked a little bit different. I’ve worked on maintaining every part (namely, the frontend, backend, API, and database) for previous applications, taken part in planning and mapping out new applications, and then actually spent time building those applications. I’ve worked with new languages like Rust, interacted with the PostgreSQL database with tools like SQLAlchemy and Alembic, dipped my toes into the waters of TypeScript, and learned what the heck an API actually is by building one -- both in GraphQL _and_ REST. I’ve tried out a little bit of Kafka (although that endeavor was discarded shortly after experimenting) and taught myself how to use Figma to build prototypes for the team’s brand new application. I like to tell people that graduating from college did not excuse me from continuing to learn, but instead I now just get paid to do it. :-) I’ve worked week-by-week with stakeholders, having to extract the “needs” from the long list of “wants” I’m presented with. I’ve become deeply familiar with scrum ceremonies and have been forced to learn how to develop professional relationships and cordial friendships over the phone.

Phew. What a year.

While composing the list of new things I’ve learned over the past year, I had a memory from my second year of college come to mind. Several years ago, I was in a web development class where I was instructed to write a very basic REST API. After giving up learning through reading my very outdated textbook, I remember watching at least ten YouTube videos describing what a REST API was. I concluded my bingeing session with no more knowledge about this mysterious concept than I began with. It was one of those moments where I felt like I didn’t belong in this industry because I couldn’t understand a concept that all my other classmates _seemed_ to grasp. Nevertheless, I persisted and continued to use up all the office hours my professors had offered (hopefully not to their dismay) and bit by bit… I began to understand. The fog began to lift, just inches at a time. And now, I can say that I’ve built APIs, even ones of multiple paradigms!

To those a few steps behind me and to my future self: what you know now is far from all you will know in the future. And you will get there, bit by bit, with persistence accompanied by a childlike curiosity and joy. Don’t rush it. Don’t waste precious learning time worrying about whether you know enough, because at the end of the day, we’re all still learning and nobody (I repeat, **_nobody_**) knows it all.