---
title: "Them"
date: "2021-05-06"
---

I'm well on my way to reaching my goal of reading twelve books by the end of 2021. By "well on my way" I mean that I've finished about six books so far, which is actually a bit ahead of where I should be to read one book per month. It's possible that by the end of the year, I may have exceeded my twelve book goal, but I'd rather that than scramble to meet a lofty goal. In my opinion, far-reaching goals are more harmful than helpful because not only are they difficult to accomplish, but when you _don't_ reach them (which seems to be more common than not), you are likely to feel badly about or disappointed in yourself. In fact, you may even quit ahead of time knowing that you won't make it. More moderate goals, however, are reachable and bring a sense of accomplishment. Reading twelve books in an entire year is not particularly hard. However, I'm not sure I'd have to motivation to do it if I didn't have a goal set. **Sustainable progress is made in tiny toddler steps, not by dramatic leaps and bounds**.

But I digress, as this post is actually about my current read, not the concept of goals and resolutions. On any given evening, after reading about four pages of my most recent book (sometimes even less), I usually put it down and go on a twenty minute rant about how brilliant I believe the author to be and how grateful I am for his fresh perspective on old topics. The book is titled _"[Them: Why We Hate Each Other - and How to Heal.](https://www.amazon.com/Them-Hate-Each-Other-Heal/dp/1250193680)"_ It's authored by Ben Sasse, a Nebraskan senator who has managed to become disliked by many on all sides of the political spectrum for his "middle of the road" approach. What I appreciate about Sasse is his desire for things to be better (in his case, through conservativism) without the hyperpartisanship. He looks at problems and asks, "how can we solve this?" instead of "whose fault is this?", unlike so many of the political leaders in America today. He doesn't care for the arguing if it doesn't lead to solving the problem.

What is even more interesting, though, is that Sasse believes that the reason for such a dramatic and hateful political climate has nothing to do with politics. Instead, he believes it is because Americans are so incredibly lonely that it comes out as anger, and in turn wreaking havoc on our society. He gives the name "anti-tribe" to the groups of people that have bonded not over the things they are working towards, but instead over the things that they hate. Conservatives become closer to each other when they hate on the liberals, the liberals become closer to each other when they hate on the conservatives. Americans have begun to replace community with social media and people are becoming less and less rooted by moving from city to city, state to state, and job to job. This makes the typical person's social circle a group made of up of people online who likely agree with what they already believe.

About halfway through the book, things begin to get a bit depressing. The reader is now fully aware of the fact that reporters have agendas, politicians are not all they appear to be, and that people are becoming more lonely and addicted. The good news is this, though: things can change, and it starts with ourselves. If we attempt to change our whole world starting tomorrow we won't get very far and we're likely to feel so overwhelmed by the weight of such an impossible task that we do nothing at all. But the world does change when people begin making small steps in their own lives. We've seen this happen already: many are choosing to buy paper newspapers and put strict limits on their social media accounts. In a world of all things digital, people are prioritizing human interaction on a weekly basis. This is good! We just need more of it. In my life, I've resolved to stay rooted by being okay with living in the same apartment for the next two years, because that means I'll actually get to know some of my neighbors instead of up and moving every several months. I've decided to stay at my current company for the foreseeable future because even though a firm-switch might result in a pay raise, it does not result in a feeling of belonging or purpose. I'm hoping to stay in Portland, probably forever, because life is not worth living without consistent friends and family close by. I've decided that my volunteer hours are worth giving at the same place for many years because although it may be less shiny and exciting than it was at the beginning, dedication is how real impact is made and value is provided. I'll continue to show up to my weekly commitments even when I don't feel like it, because loneliness is crouching at the door.

Interestingly, all of these goals take a decent amount of drive. They are not the path of least resistance and they require conscious effort and continuous course adjustments. While some may find this overwhelming, I find this exhilarating because a life not lived well is not a life worth living at all.
